{\rtf1\ansi\deff0{\fonttbl{\f0 \fswiss Helvetica;}{\f1 Courier;}}
{\colortbl;\red255\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;}
\widowctrl\hyphauto

{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 Eduardo Blancas Reyes\par}
{
\trowd \trgaph120
\cellx8640
\trkeep\intbl
{
{{\pard\intbl \qr \f0 \sa0 \li0 \fi0 {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "mailto:e.blancas@columbia.edu"}}{\fldrslt{\ul
e.blancas@columbia.edu
}}}
 / {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://edublancas.github.io"}}{\fldrslt{\ul
edublancas.github.io
}}}
\par}
\cell}
}
\intbl\row}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Education\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 {\b Columbia University} Aug 2017 - Dec 2018 (Expected)\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 M.S. in Data Science\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Relevant coursework: Algorithms for Data Science, Machine Learning with Probabilistic Programming.\line \line {\b Universidad Nacional Aut\u243?noma de M\u233?xico (UNAM)} Aug 2016 - Jun 2017\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Graduate Certificate in Applied Statistics\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Relevant coursework: Statistical Inference, Sampling Techniques, Multivariate Analysis, Experimental Design, Categorical Data Analysis, Regression Models and Bayesian Inference.\line \line {\b Instituto Tecnol\u243?gico y de Estudios Superiores de Monterrey (ITESM)} Jan 2011 - May 2015\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 B.S. in Mechatronics Engineering. Graduated with honors.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Coursework in analog and digital electronics, instrumentation, control theory, embedded systems.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Professional Experience\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 {\b Columbia University (Grossman Center for the Statistics of Mind)} New York, NY\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 {\i Research Assistant (Advisor: Liam Paninski)} Sep 2017 - Present\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Apply novel Machine Learning tecniques to improve spike sorting\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Develop an automated spike sorting library to analyze data from dense multielectrode arrays using Python, scikit-learn and Tensorflow\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 {\b Krieger} Mexico City, MX\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 {\i Lead Backend Engineer} Jun 2016 - Aug 2017\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Oversaw backend development across projects to ensure code quality, performance and reliability\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Developed internal software tools that are used in several ongoing projects (input validation, software versioning, deployment, user permissions). These tools have reduced development time and increased team\u8217's productivity\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab REST Web Services development using Python and Google Cloud\line \sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 {\b University of Chicago (Center for Data Science and Public Policy)} Chicago, IL\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 {\i Data Science Fellow (Advisor: Rayid Ghani)} May 2015 - Jun 2016\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Developed a Machine Learning model using spatiotemporal data for the City of Cincinnati to identify properties at risk of building code violations. Engineering a fully automated and reproducible pipeline to ingest new datasets and update the model. Worked with more than 50GB of data.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Designed a predictive model for Infonavit (largest mortgage provider in Mexico) to predict home abandonment. Worked with more than 100GB of data\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Publications\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab K. Ackermann, {\b E. Blancas Reyes}, S. He, T. Anderson Keller, P. van der Boor. R. Khan, R. Ghani. Designing Policy Recommendations to Reduce Home Abandonment in Mexico. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, KDD \u8217'16.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab {\b E. Blancas Reyes}, J. Helsby, K. Rasch, P. van der Boor, L. Haynes, R. Ghani, E. Cunningham. Early detection of properties at risk of blight using spatiotemporal data. Data for Policy 2016 at University of Cambridge.\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Skills\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 {\b Programming languages}: Python, R, Objective-C, SQL. {\b Tools and technologies}: scikit-learn, numpy, flask, Google App Engine, Google Cloud Datastore, Google Cloud Storage, PostgreSQL, PostGIS, Docker, MongoDB, Amazon EC2, Amazon S3, Amazon Beanstalk\par}
}
