---
layout: post
title: The case against data versioning
comments: true
---

A recent technique to advocate for reproducibility in data analysis is *data versioning*, which means that some (or all) intermediate files generated by the pipeline are saved and tagged so we can come back to them at any moment. But I think data versioning is actually *harmful* for reproducibility.

Reproducibility is defined as the *"ability of a researcher to duplicate the results of a prior study using the same materials as were used by the original investigator. Reproducibility is a minimum necessary condition for a finding to be believable and informative [(Source)](https://stm.sciencemag.org/content/8/341/341ps12.full).”*  The key term here is *materials*. The only materials in a data pipeline are the raw data and the code, all other artifacts are byproducts which should not be considered.

We can test for reproducibility by answering the following question: given the *same raw data and code*, do we get the same results? Using intermediate results and claim reproducibility is cheating, since we are overlooking all previous computations that originated such interim results.

*Reproducibility can only be achieved by construction*, it is not a feature you add to your pipeline. The bad news is that you cannot do `pip install reproducibility`; the only way to achieve is through better software engineering practices. The good news is that verifying reproducibility is trivial.

**Verifying reproducibility**

Verifying that a data pipeline is reproducible is as simple as passing *raw data* and comparing the *claimed final output*:

```python
import pipeline

result_final = pipeline.run('/path/to/raw/data.csv')
result_expected = 42

assert result_final == result_expected
```

**Saving intermediate results is useful (for other purposes)**

Data pipelines are built from steps that run one after the other, when the final output is unexpected, storing intermediate results makes our pipeline more transparent: we can go inspect those results and identify which step went wrong.

They are also useful for avoiding redundant computation. Pipelines usually take a lot of time to run, doing an end-to-end run every time we make a small change is wasteful. Selectively running the steps affected by the changes should lead us to the same result had we executed the pipeline end-to-end.

**Versioning your final output**

There is one piece of your pipeline that you can version: the final output. If you want to automate reproducibility verification, then you might want to store the final output to compare with the pipeline's output whenever a change is introduced. If results do not match, your pipeline is no longer reproducible.